---
published: true
layout: guide
title: Award Fields
categories: ['awards']
sort: 3
---

There are a number of fields which can be filled out when creating or editing an award. These fields all impact on the effectiveness of the award interpreter so it is important to get them right! Contact PayAus Support if you ever need a hand.

### Name

The name of the award must *exactly* match the name of the appropriate pay item (or earnings rate, or wage category, etc.) in your accounting package.

### Applies on...

*Choose when this award should apply.*

For general awards that apply on any day, choose "Always". Otherwise, check the appropriate boxes to fill out the criteria.

It is possible to have an award only apply on a specific day and time. For example, you can have an award only apply on Wednesdays (using the Specific Days option) between 9pm and midnight (using the Specific Times option)

Check the Public Holidays option to specify which public holidays apply to you. Click the question mark for a full list of public holidays in each region. [Contact PayAus](http://www.payaus.com/about?from=help) if a public holiday from your area is missing.

### Applies to..

*Choose which staff this award applies to. You should choose <b>only</b> one of the following options:*

* For general awards that apply to all staff, chose "Everyone".
* Categorised staff: enter one or more [tags](../../staff/team/#fields_available) you have applied to staff. Only staff with this tag will have this award applied to their shifts.
* Probationary staff: enter a number (in months). Staff who have been employed for less than that period (calculated based on their [employment start date](../../staff/team/#fields_available)) will have this award applied.

### Applies to specific ages...

*If your award applies to staff of a certain age, you can specify these ages here. See [age based awards](../ages/) for more information.*

Generally this will be the case if you have wage categories in your accounting package with names like "Base Hourly 16yo", "Base Hourly 17yo", "Base Hourly 18yo", etc. This is an alternative to using multipliers in some accounting packages. See our [age-based awards guide](../ages/) for more information.

If you include the string `{age}` (including the brackets) in the name of your award, this will be replaced by the age of the employee when exporting their timesheets. The age is calculated based on the [date of birth](../../staff/team/#fields_available) you provide. See our [age-based awards guide](../ages/) for more information on how this is applied.

### Roster dependent overtime

*This award applies to time clocked outside of a rostered shift. You can set an award to apply to all time clocked outside a roster, or only to the first few hours.*

If you enable this setting, it is **very** important to keep your rosters correct up to date. Time worked outside of a rostered shift will have this award applied. If any roster is entered incorrectly you could end up paying staff the wrong amount. To enable the setting, tick the checkbox. You can set a roster dependent overtime award to only apply for the first *n* hours of overtime. For example, you can have one award that applies for the first two hours of overtime (set the field to 2), and another that applies for the rest (set the field to 0).

Roster dependent overtime awards only apply for the conditions entered in the previous sections. Thus you can configure a roster dependent overtime award to only apply for shifts on weekdays, or only to certain ages, etc.

There are some limitations to be aware of when designing your awards:

* [Maximum shift length awards](#penalties) cannot be applied on the same shifts as roster dependent overtime awards.
* Roster dependent overtime awards do not work if you have more than one roster for the same employee on the same date.

The following restrictions *may* be removed in future. Please [contact PayAus](http://www.payaus.com/about?from=help) if they are causing you issues.

* Roster dependent overtime only applies if the end of a shift goes beyond the rostered finishing time. It does not apply at the start of shifts.
* Roster dependent overtime awards cannot be set to apply between certain times. For example, you cannot have a roster dependent overtime award that only kicks in for time worked between 6pm and midnight. If you apply time restrictions to a roster dependent overtime award they will be ignored.
* Time based awards may not apply accurately when used alongside roster dependent overtime awards. For example, say someone gets a particular rate between 2pm and 8pm. If they are rostered to work until 6:15pm but work until 7pm, the 45 minutes of overtime will get the roster dependent overtime award applied. However, the time based award will only apply between 2pm and 6pm - the 15 minutes between 6pm and 6:15pm will *not* get the time based award applied; they will be covered by the default award. The best way to mitigate this is to always roster staff to the hour, *or* to not use time based awards directly alongside roster dependent overtime awards. You may also find [shift rounding](../../settings/settings/#rounding_of_shifts) helpful.
* [Regular overtime awards](#penalties) can be applied alongside roster dependent overtime, in the sense that the hours awarded by a roster dependent overtime award will count towards your week's hours. However, a roster dependent overtime award will always be applied *before* a regular overtime award, and you are not able to have a roster dependent overtime award only apply once someone has worked more than a certain threshold of hours.

### Penalties

*If your award is dependent on how many hours the employee has already worked, you can set up these dependencies here.*

* Overtime: if the award applies after a certain number of hours have been worked in the pay period (eg. after 38 hours worked in a week), specify that number here. Note that this is based on your PayAus pay period: if your timesheets are fortnightly, this will count the number of hours worked in the fortnight.
* Maximum shift length: if the award applies after a certain number of hours have been worked in a shift (eg. for shifts longer than 10 hours), specify the number here.
* Minimum shift length: if there is a minimum length of shift you must pay staff, specify the number of hours here. Shifts that are shorter than the minimum will have this award added to make up the required shift length.

### Pay Rates

*Add additional data about your award. This data is not used by the award interpreter, but is used in other parts of PayAus for cost estimates. Hourly rates take precedence over multipliers, and salaries take precedence over both, so you only ever need to provide one field.*

* Weekly salary: the fixed weekly for salary this award pays. If entered, this is always used as the cost estimate for staff on this award. You should set this award to apply "always". You can enter decimals (eg. 1263.62 ($/week)).
* Hourly rate: the per hour rate this award pays, in dollars. If entered, this takes precedence over a multiplier. You can enter decimals (eg. 14.63 ($/hour)).
* Multiplier: the multiplier that is applied for this award. You can enter decimals (eg. 1.25 (x)). The multiplier is applied to the "base award" &mdash; the most generic award created for the employee in question that has an hourly rate. If no base award is found, it uses the employee's hourly rate as entered in their [staff profile](../../staff/team/#fields_available). Thus, if you choose the multiplier option, you should either:
	* Create an award with an hourly rate that applies every day to the same staff to which this award applies
	* Add base hourly rates for all staff to which this award applies
	* Or do both; the generic award's hourly rate will take precedence