---
layout: guide
title: Tracking Time Off In Lieu
categories: ['payroll']
sort: 8
---

Time off in Lieu (TOIL) is a common - and we think, very fair - way to reimburse full time staff for extra hours they put in. The process simply involves marking down extra hours an employee works, and giving the option to be paid for that time - without working it - at a later date.

For example, Sally works at a childcare centre. She might need to work more than 8 hours most days as she has to wait for the all of the children to be picked up. Sally is a full time employee covered by an award, if she works more than 8 hours every day she will end up working more hours a week or month than is allowed under her award.

Instead of paying Sally overtime some awards allow employees to take time off in lieu. This guide explains how you can use PayAus to track TOIL accurately and easily in your accounting system. Different accounting systems will have different processes for handling TOIL, we suggest contacting support for yours if you aren't sure. In this guide we are giong to show how to set up TOIL using PayAus and MYOB.

PayAus allows you to track various allowances alongside your timesheets easily. For example, a pizza restaurant may pay a fixed rate for each pizza delivered, or a farm may pay a fixed rate for each sheep sheered. Using PayAus, you can enter this allowance data while managing timesheets, and export it to your accounting package automatically.

## PayAus Setup
First we'll create an award that applies when staff are earning TOIL - that is, when they are working longer than expected. Go to your [Modern Awards](../../awards/) and create a new award named "Non Paid Hours" (note: the name of the award is not important, we've chosen this name as it matches the MYOB instructions we'll see later). Configure the award as follows:

* Set the award to apply at all times
* Set the award to apply to Categorised Staff, then select a tag for your full time staff. ([Read more about tags](../../tags).)
* In the costs section, set the multiplier to 1.0. This indicates the accounting cost of the shifts - even though the cash cost will differ slightly.

There are three methods for actually applying TOIL. The method you choose depends on the logic by which you apply TOIL in your business (check with Fair Work if you're not sure).

### Method #1 - Fixed Shift Length
With this method, TOIL is awarded for shifts longer than a certain length - for example, 8 hours. To do this, enter 8 in the Maximum Shift Length field under Penalties.

### Method #2 - Roster Overtime
With this method, TOIL is awarded when staff work beyond their rostered hours. To do this, tick the box in the Roster Dependent Overtime section. If you only award TOIL for staff working well beyond their roster - for example, 2 hours overtime - enter the appropriate number of hours (2 in this case) into the box below.

### Method #3 - Hour-based Overtime
With this method, TOIL is awarded when staff work more than a specified number of hours in a pay period. To do this, enter the number of hours in the Overtime field. For example, 38 hours for weekly timesheets or 76 hours for fortnightly ones.

We're all done with this award! The next step is to create an award that staff can use to claim TOIL. We're going to use the PayAus leave module to do this. The first step is to create a new leave type. Go to your [Modern Awards](../../awards/) and create a new award named "Time in Lieu" (again, the name isn't important). The only other bit of configuration you need to do is to tick the box at the bottom indicating the award applies to Paid Leave.

What have we done so far?

* We've created an award that kicks in when staff are working longer than expected. TIme worked in these hours is "unpaid" but is still recorded.
* We've created a leave category that staff can use to claim leave via the leave portal for time in lieu.

Next, we'll finish the job in MYOB.

## MYOB Setup
MYOB have an extensive guide to this process at [http://myobaustralia.custhelp.com/app/answers/detail/a_id/11212](http://myobaustralia.custhelp.com/app/answers/detail/a_id/11212). We'll summarise it here, but click the link for more information.

1. Create a Wage Category called "Non Paid Hours" (or whatever name you chose on the PayAus side) that's paid hourly with a fixed hourly rate of $0.
2. Create a Wage Category called "Time in Lieu" (or whatever name you chose on the PayAus side) that's paid hourly with a multiplier of 1.0. Tick the box to automatically adjust the base hourly or salary.
3. Create a Payroll Entitlement called TOIL, equal to 100% of the Non Paid Hours wage category. Link this to the Time in Lieu wage category.

So in a nutshell, we've created two wage categories, and an entitlement that will balance them against each other, so that staff can claim TOIL from a balance that accumulates as their unpaid hours accumulate.

## Using TOIL
You don’t need to do anything further to log TOIL, just have your staff clock in and out, and [export your timesheets](../../payroll/exports) to MYOB as usual. To claim TOIL, either you or your staff should record leave using the Time in Lieu category - then export this to MYOB and it’ll do the rest.

## Other Accounting Systems
Don't use MYOB? Not all accounting systems have the entitlements functionality that MYOB uses to achieve TOIL. Contact the support department for your accounting system and ask them how they recommend processing it. Or, [contact us](https://www.payaus.com/about) - we'll be happy to help point you in the right direction.